# HIBERNATE SEQUENCE OPTIMIZERS


- how the hibernate sequence-based optimizer are categorized.

- how hi/lo, polled and pooled-lo optimizers work trying to identify performance differences.


----

## Optimizers 

We can distinguish the Optimizers identifiers in two categories:

- **Legacy**: Prior (being) Hibernate 5.0 like SequenceGenerators 
    - Prior Hibernate 5, The SEQUENCE AND TABLE identifiers generators were implemented using a now-deprecated SequenceGenerator, the **SequenceHiLoGenerator** and **MultipleHiLoPerTableGenerator**.

- **Newer**:  
    - In Hibernate 5, newer and more efficient implementations such as **SequenceStyleGenerator** and **TableGenerator** add been added, which allows us to configure, a sequence-based optimizer.

- These two categories are not compatible, and the application developer must either choose the legacy identifiers or the enhanced ones.

- While the legacy sequence-based identifier generators could only use the **hi/lo** optimizer, the newer ones can also use the **pooled** and **pooled-lo** sequence allocation algorithms which are superior to the legacy hi/lo one.

----

- Prior Hibernate 5, to enable the enhanced identifier generators, a configuration must be used:

```xml
<property name="hibernate.id.new_generator_mappings" value="true"/>
```

- In fact, the new identifier generators are available since 2007 (Hibernate 3.2.3), but they are disable by default, because they are not backward compatible with the legacy ones. So, to switch to the new identifier generator the previous configuration must be used.

- Since Hibernate 5 the previous configurations is enable by default. we don't have to do anything if we want to use the improved generators. 
- Hibernate 5 has decided to drop support for the legacy identifiers and to use the enhanced
ones by default.

----

## Hi/lo algorithm

- The **hi/lo** algorithm is the oldest hibernate sequence-base optimizer. if we want/need to use it, we need to set the **optimizer** parameters of the **SequenceStyleGenerator** to hilo, (last line of parameters). 


```java

@Entity
public class Payment {
    
    @Id
    @GeneratedValue(
            strategy = GenerationType.SEQUENCE, 
            generator = "hilo") 
    @GenericGenerator(
        name = "hilo",
        strategy = "org.hibernate.id.enhanced.SequenceStyleGenerator", 
        parameters = {
                @Parameter(name = "sequence_name", value = "sequence"), 
                @Parameter(name = "initial_value", value = "1"), 
                @Parameter(name = "increment_size", value = "3"), 
                @Parameter(name = "optimizer", value = "hilo")}
    )
    private Long id;

}
```
 


### Hi/Lo Consequencies:

- The HI/LO has major limitation:

  - All database clients must be aware of this algorithm. As long everyone uses this algorithm, everything is fine.
  
  - The biggest problem comes when other applications need to insert data into our tables.
  
  - If a DBA or applications must insert a row in some table, the DBA or applications must use the hi/lo algorithm to determine the range of values that can be safely used. Otherwise conflicts can occur.
  
Because of this limitations some news identifiers generators have been developed.


The new identifier generators make use of sequence-based optimizer algorithms that are interoperable with external clients who may be unaware of the application-level optimization techniques in-use.

---


## Pooled Optimizer 

- The pooled optimizer can be also configured via SequenceStyleGenerator configuration mapping.

- The value of the optimizer configuration should be pooled.

```java
@Entity
public class Payment {
    
    @Id
    @GeneratedValue(
            strategy = GenerationType.SEQUENCE, 
            generator = "pooled") 
    @GenericGenerator(
        name = "pooled",
        strategy = "org.hibernate.id.enhanced.SequenceStyleGenerator", 
        parameters = {
                @Parameter(name = "sequence_name", value = "sequence"), 
                @Parameter(name = "initial_value", value = "1"), 
                @Parameter(name = "increment_size", value = "3"), 
                @Parameter(name = "optimizer", value = "polled")}
    )
    private Long id;
}
```

- The **pooled** is the **default** optimizer **when the sequence allocation size is greater than 1**. so we can simplify the identifier mapping like the following (using just JPA annotations):  

```java
@Entity
public class Payment {
    
    @Id
    @GeneratedValue(
            strategy = GenerationType.SEQUENCE, 
            generator = "pooled") 
    @GenericGenerator(
        name = "pooled",
        parameters = {
                @Parameter(name = "sequence_name", value = "sequence"), 
                @Parameter(name = "increment_size", value = "3")}
    )
    private Long id;
}
```

The Pooled optimizer works as follows:

1.  The sequence value is incremented with the value set by incrementSize attribute. 
In our example the initial value is 1, and the incrementSize is 3.
2. The sequence is going to generate the values: 1, 4, 7, 10 and so on....
3. The HI-VALUE represent the maximum value which can be allocated in one step.
4. when the HI-VALUE is 1, it means it already reached the maximum value for this step, and hibernate is going to fetch the next HI-VALUE, which is 4.
    - Because the HI-VALUE is 4, Hibernate knows that it can safely allocate the identifier values 2,  3 and 4, since no other threads can ever allocate the same identifier values.
5. After inserting the entity with the identifier value of 4, the next HI-VALUE is 7. So we can safely insert the value of 5, 6 and 7.

6. **_If some external system tries to insert a new record using the next sequence value no conflict will occur since the value of 10 has never been allocated to Hibernate._**

7. After inserting the last entity with the last HI-VALUE, hibernate calls the sequence again and the next HI-VALUE is going to be 13, so the next identifier values are going to 11, 12 and 13





## Pooled-Lo optimizer

The Pooled-LO can also be configured vi SequenceStyleGenerator configuration mapping, like the previous optimizers, the only difference the optimizer parameter should have the value **pooled-lo**.


```java
@Entity
public class Payment {
    
    @Id
    @GeneratedValue(
            strategy = GenerationType.SEQUENCE, 
            generator = "pooled-lo") 
    @GenericGenerator(
        name = "pooled-lo",
        strategy = "org.hibernate.id.enhanced.SequenceStyleGenerator", 
        parameters = {
                @Parameter(name = "sequence_name", value = "sequence"), 
                @Parameter(name = "initial_value", value = "1"), 
                @Parameter(name = "increment_size", value = "3"), 
                @Parameter(name = "optimizer", value = "pooled-lo")}
    )
    private Long id;
}
```


#### Description of the algorithm:

the sequence is incremented in steps, given the allocationSize attribute. 

1. This time, the database sequence value fetched by the hibernate represents the **LO-VALUE** or **Minimum value which can ve allocated in one step**. 

    - So when the LO-VALUE is 1, this means that the hibernate can generate the values 1, 2 and 3.
2. when running out of identifier values, hibernate calls the database sequence, and now the next LO-VALUE is going to be 4. so we can insert entities using the identifier values 4, 5 and 6.
3. If some external system tries to insert a new record, they will use the next sequence value which is 7. 
4. However again when hibernate is running out of the identifiers values (after using the last identifier value), the hibernate calls the sequence again, so this time the next LO-VALUE is going to be 10. 

Just like with the pooled optimizer, the identifier assignment can never lead to conflicts.


---

## The default sequence identifier generator

The JPA identifier generator strategy only specifies the identifier type and not the algorithm used for generating such identifiers.
For the sequence generator, considering the following JPA mapping:

```java

@Entity
public class Payment {
    @Id
    @GeneratedValue(generator = "some_sequence", strategy=GenerationType.SEQUENCE)
    @SequenceGenerator(name="some_sequence", allocationSize=3)
    private Long id;
}

```

- The Hibernate chooses the SequenceHiLoGenerator when the **hibernate.id.new_generator_mappings** property is **false**. This was the default value for hibernate 3 and 4.


- The legacy SequenceHiLoGenerator uses the HI/LO algorithm, and, if the allocation size is greater than one, database interoperability could be compromised (every insert must be done according to the hi/lo algorithm rules).

- If the **hibernate.id.new_generator_mappings** configuration property is **true** (the default setting for Hibernate 5), then the JPA mapping above will use the **SequenceStyleGenerator** instead. Unlike its previous predecessor, the SequenceStyleGenerator uses configurable identifier optimizer strategies, and the application developer can even supply its own optimization implementation.


- By default, the **SequenceStyleGenerator** and **TableGenerator** identifier generators uses the pooled optimizer. If the **hibernate.id.optimizer.pooled.prefer_lo** configuration property is set to **true**, Hibernate will use the pooled-lo optimizer by default.

Both the pooled and the pooled-lo encode the database sequence value into the identifier range boundaries, so allocating a new value using the actual database sequence call does not interfere with the identifier generator allocation process.



---

# Summary 

- The Optimizers can save additional database roundtrips, it is obvious that they can help reducing transaction response times.

- The higher the allocationSize, 

    - the lower the number of database roundtrips.
    - less time is needed to generate the alocationSize entities
    - note that, even calling a database SEQUENCE 50 time, it still tales less than 500 microseconds.
    
- The Table generators are less efficients than the sequences.
- The more threads we use, the less efficient the table generator becomes, that is because a database SEQUENCE use a very lightweight locking mechanism, while the table generator requires a separate database connection and row-level locks which incur a significant performance penalty.
  
  
- Comparing IDENTITY with table tells the same story. Even if the TABLE generator benefits from the pooled optimizer and JDBC batch inserts, the IDENTITY generator is still faster.

So, we should never use the TABLE generator, because not only that is takes longer to generate a single identifier value, but it can become a performance bottleneck when there are multiple concurrent threads tying to generate identifiers.
    





