# AUTO FlushModeType

- AUTO flush mode - JPA vs Hibernate
- Hibernate AUTO flush mode gotcha
- Hibernate SQL queries consistency workarounds

## AUTO flush mode - JPA vs Hibernate


| AUTO flush mode Behavior   |      Behavior      |
|----------------------------|:------------------:|
| **JPA**      | * It’s the default mode and triggers a flush before every query execution (JPQL or native SQL query), and prior to committing a transaction. | 
| **Hibernate** | It’s the default Hibernate flushing mechanism, and, while it flushes the Persistence Context on every transaction commit, it does not necessarily trigger a flush before every query execution.   | 
    
When using JPA or when bootstrapping Hibernate as a JPA provider, the default AUTO flush mode will trigger a flush before every query execution (JPQL or native SQL query), and prior to committing a transaction.

When bootstrapping Hibernate using the native mechanism, the default AUTO flush mode flushes the Persistence Context on every transaction commit, but it does not necessarily trigger a flush before every query execution.

##### The default Hibernate-specific FlushMode.AUTO employs a smart flushing mechanism:

1. When executing an **HQL** or a **JPQL** query, Hibernate inspects what tables the current query is about to scan 
2. triggers a flush only if there is a pending entity state transition matching the query table space.

With this optimization we can reduce the number of flush calls and delay the first-level cache synchronization as much as possible.

**Unfortunately, this optimization does not work for native SQL queries.** Because Hibernate does not have a parser for every database-specific query language, it cannot determine the database tables associated with a given native SQL query.




## Hibernate AUTO flush mode gotcha

- how the Hibernate-specific AUTO flush mode works when executing a native SQL query?

However, instead of flushing before every native SQL query, Hibernate relies on the application developer to instruct what table spaces need to be synchronized.


## Hibernate SQL queries consistency workarounds

- how to fix the Hibernate-specific AUTO flush inconsistencies when running native SQL queries?

To guarantee SQL query consistency, the application developer can switch to **FlushMode.ALWAYS**. This can be done either at the Session level or on a per query-basis. 

We have two options:

* The **FlushMode.ALWAYS** triggers a flush prior to executing any query, be it JPQL, Criteria or a native SQL query.

```java
    List<ForumCount> result = 
        session.createNativeQuery(
        "SELECT b.name as forum, COUNT (p) as count " +
        "FROM post p " +
        "JOIN board b on b.id = p.board_id " +
        "GROUP BY forum")
    .setFlushMode(FlushMode.ALWAYS)
    .setResultTransformer(Transformers.aliasToBean(ForumCount.class))
    .getResultList();
```

* Adding query table space info: Explicitly set the table spaces affected by this native SQL query. By knowing what database tables will be affected by this SQL query, Hibernate will trigger a flush if there is any pending entity overlapping the query table space.

```java
    List<ForumCount> result = session.createNativeQuery(
        "SELECT b.name as forum, COUNT (p) as count " +
        "FROM post p " +
        "JOIN board b on b.id = p.board_id " +
        "GROUP BY forum")
    .addSynchronizedEntityClass(Board.class)
    .addSynchronizedEntityClass(Post.class)
    .setResultTransformer(Transformers.aliasToBean(ForumCount.class))
    .getResultList();

```




